UNIT 1
INTRODUCTION TO NEURAL NETWORKS
AND DEEP LEARNING
STUDY GOALS
After completing this unit you will be able to ...
– describe what neurons in the brain are.
– explain how neurons process information in a simple picture.
– understand what the receptive field is.
– recall how perceptrons were developed as the first artificial models of biological neurons.
– explain the relevance of multi-layer perceptrons as the precursors to modern artificial
neural networks and deep learning architectures.
1. INTRODUCTION TO NEURAL NETWORKS
AND DEEP LEARNING
Introduction
Neural networks and deep learning have seen tremendous successes in recent years and
are at the core of the current technological revolution in data science and articial intelligence.
Success stories are heard from all sectors and areas, both in research and industrial
applications. Most of the “smart technologies”, such as digital assistants like Google Assistant,
Apple’s Siri, and Amazon’s Alexa, use deep learning approaches, and autonomous
vehicles would not be possible without advanced neural networks. In many cases, technologies
developed using deep learning techniques already reach human-level performance
in the respective task. For example, in medicine researchers used retinal images to
predict cardiovascular risk factors (Poplin et al., 2018), classify skin cancer on the same
level as human dermatologists (Esteva et al., 2017), and even take the first steps in mindreading
by constructing images from human brain activity (Shen et al., 2019). In the field
of material science, researchers can use deep learning to automate the analysis of damage
sites in a material and further the understanding of the underlying mechanisms and properties
(Kusche et al., 2019). There are many examples of neural networks and deep learning
technologies that have a direct impact on our lives. For example, these technologies
can identify persons in surveillance or CCTV cameras (Hill, 2020) and assessing prison sentences
in the judiciary system (Israni, 2017).
What are neural networks, and what is deep learning? The origins of neural networks go
back to 1943, when McCulloch and Pitts (1943) posited that neural activity can be described
by logic. Rosenblatt (1958; 1961) developed the perceptron, and the first networks
with multiple layers were created by Ivakhnenko et al. (1966). Further details can be found
in the literature of Schmidhuber (2015). The term “deep learning” is not as easily defined.
Until the late 2010s, neural networks consisted mainly of a few layers of artificial neurons.
The boost in computing technology (in particular, the development of powerful graphic
cards) allowed for the training of large networks with many neurons organized in numerous
intermediate layers. For some, deep learning is simply the contrast of these complex
neural networks compared to the “shallow” networks used before. However, Yann LeCun
(2020), one of the prominent figures in deep learning, recently said that deep learning “is
an architectural language with enormous flexibility”, and he stresses the advantage of the
flexibility provided by recently-developed toolkits.
In this unit, we will take a closer look at what has inspired and enabled the dramatic technological
developments leading to these and many other successes. We will first take a
closer look at the human brain, which is able to perform many very complex tasks and
often serves as an inspiration and benchmark in the development of technological solutions.
Then, we will investigate the historical origins of the development of neural networks,
focusing on the development of perceptions in particular.
16
1.1 The Biological Brain
The Anatomy of the Brain
The human brain is arguably the most complex organ we posses, and, together with the
spinal cord, makes up the nervous system. The following figure shows a schematic overview
of the brain, which is located in the human skull and protected by a thick layer of
bones. The main function of the brain is to control the activities of the body, as well as
receive and process information we receive from our sensory organs (eyes, skin, etc.). The
brain also sends instructions to the rest of the body, either as a reaction (e.g., when we
touch a hot oven), or as a result of deliberate considerations (e.g., when we want to walk
somewhere or grab an object).
Figure 1: Schematic Overview of the Human Brain
Source: Kerzel (2020).
17
The brain is divided into several sections, the main ones being the cerebrum, brainstem,
and cerebellum. The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain in humans and is further
divided into two cerebral hemispheres, each of which is typically divided into four lobes:
frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital. The frontal lobe is mainly associated with
abstract functions such as planning, reasoning, and abstract thought, and the occipital
lobe is mainly associated with processing visual information. There are substantial differences
in the brains of women and men; for example, the typical weight of the male brain is
between 1.180 and 1.620 kg (Molina & DiMaio, 2012), while the female brain weighs
between 1.030 and 1.400 kg (Molina & DiMaio, 2015). However, neurological differences
between the male and female brains have not been shown to have an influence on measures
of cognitive performance, e.g., intelligence quotient (IQ) (Gur et al., 1999).
Figure 2: Schematic Overview of a Neuron
Source: LadyofHats (2007). Public domain.
On a microanatomical level, the human brain consists of approximately 86.1 ± 8.1 billion
neurons supported or “glued together” by a large number of glial cells (Azevedo et al.,
2009). The figure above shows a schematic overview of a nerve cell or neuron. We can distinguish
two main parts: a central body called the soma and “wires” that radiate away
from the central cell body. These are called neurites and can be further distinguished into
axons and dendrites. The axons carry the output of the neuron and form the synapse at
their end to connect to other neurons. In many cases, the end of the axon branches out
into a terminal arbor, where the axon connects to many other neurons via synapses. In
most cases, the electrical signal passed along the axon is not directly transmitted to other
neurons. Instead, the synapse and the neuron it connects to are separated by a small gap.
18
The electrical signal is converted into a chemical signal that transverses this gap, i.e., the
electrical signal indicates the release of chemicals called neurotransmitters that convey
information from one neuron to the next. The dendrites, on the other hand, are akin to
“antennae” of the neurons and are covered in many synapses. Here, specialized molecules
act as receptors for the neurotransmitters released by other neurons via their axon. Since
each neuron has a large number of dendrites, and each dendrite is covered in thousands
of synapses, each neuron can receive signals from many other neurons. In the figure
below, we can see a very simplified picture depicting a single neuron with connections to
other neurons.
Figure 3: Simplified Overview of a Neuron
Source: OpenClipart-Vectors (2016). Pixabay license.
Each neuron is connected to thousands of other neurons and receives stimuli or inputs
from all these neurons. The mechanism by which these inputs lead to an output is a crucial
detail in understanding how neurons work. Neurons at rest do not propagate an output
signal along the axon towards other neurons. In this state, the inside of the neuron is
negatively polarized at around –70 mV with regard to a place outside the cell. In order to
produce a signal, a threshold needs to be crossed by a stimulus, which leads to rapid
depolarization of the cell structure. The resulting action potential then leads to generation
of the output signal by a neuron (as seen in the figure below). Once the action potential is
triggered, the output signal of a specific neuron travels along the axon and is passed to
other neurons via neurotransmitters. After this output is sent, the neuron enters a brief
refractory period during which the neuron cannot be stimulated again to send an output
signal before it returns to its resting state.
How is this action potential triggered? Signals between neurons are transmitted chemically
via neurotransmitters rather than directly as electrical signals. Each neurotransmitter
is received by specific receptors at the end of the synaptic gap, and the reception of such a
19
neurotransmitter changes the local chemical structure of the neuron, which in turn
changes the local electrical potential of the neuron cell. These effects can be either excitatory
(i.e., working towards the triggering of an action potential) or inhibitory (i.e., countering
the triggering of an action potential). Typically, the effect of the reception of a neurotransmitter
decreases exponentially both with distance and time with respect to the
synapse where the neurotransmitter was received. In order for the threshold of the action
potential to be crossed, multiple excitatory signals must work together at approximately
the same time in order to trigger an output of a specific neuron, overcoming the effects of
any inhibitory signals by other neurotransmitters. Hence, the output of a single neuron is
determined by a complex pattern of the signals received by the other neurons to which a
specific neuron is connected.
Figure 4: Action Potential of a Neuron
Source: OpenWetWare Team (2021). CC BY-SA.
This pattern forms the basis of all processes in the brain. Crucially, memories and
thoughts are not stored genetically inside a neuron as part of the DNA. Instead, memories
and thoughts arise as the result of a complex interplay of connected neurons and the way
they pass signals between them. This fundamental principle serves as an inspiration for
20
how to build complex artificial neurons and networks of artificial neurons. This is only a
very coarse description; a more detailed discussion can be found in textbooks on neuroscience
such as the literature of Bear et al. (2007).
The Receptive Field and Visual Cortex
A large part of our sensory input is visual information. Information about light recorded on
the retina of our eye is transported by the optic nerve to the visual cortex at the back of
the brain (see the figure below).
Figure 5: The Human Visual Cortex
Source: Kerzel (2020), based on Database Center for Life Science (2012).
Both hemispheres of the brain contain a visual cortex; however, the information from the
left eye is processed in the right hemisphere, and the information from the right eye in the
left hemisphere. If a stimulus is received in the receptive field, the action potential of the
corresponding neurons is triggered and the neurons produce an output signal. According
to Levine and Shefner (1991), the receptive field is defined as the area where stimulation
21
yields a specific sensory neuron response. The visual cortex is a dedicated area of the
brain that specializes in processing information received from the eyes about static and
moving objects. When an object enters the receptive field, the corresponding neurons
“fire”, (i.e., the action potential is triggered) and the neuron produces an output. Static and
moving images generally produce different output signals, and even the direction from
which an object enters the receptive field and transverses it can result in different responses
(Bear et al., 2007).
In order to measure the receptive field of the visual system, researchers typically use an
animal which is fixated in an experimental setup and anesthetized. It is important that the
animal does not move during the experiment so they can map a visual signal to the
response of the neurons. This response is measured by inserting a thin electrode into the
visual cortex of the animal and measuring the change in electrical activity when a signal is
shown (as in the following figure). The left side of the figure shows the setup of the experiment
when no visual stimulus is shown, with the eye representing the animal in the
experiment. On the right side, the projector transmits a signal to the black screen, and the
reaction of the neurons in the visual cortex is recorded. Using different types of signals,
the scientists can then determine the size of the receptive field, the response of the neurons
to static or moving patterns, and the sensitivity to the direction in which the visual
stimulus is projected. These experiments were pioneered by Kuffler (1953), Hubel (1959),
and Hubel and Wiesel (1959; 1962; 1968).
Figure 6: Determination of the Receptive Field (Left: Setup with No Signal; Right:
Projecting a Visual Sign onto a Screen)
Source: Kerzel (2020).
22
1.2 Perceptron and Multi-Layer
Perceptrons
The perceptron is the earliest algorithm related to the development of artificial neural networks.
It was developed by Rosenblatt (1957), building on earlier work by McCulloch and
Pitts (1943). The original perceptron is a linear binary classifier, deciding whether an event
belongs to a specific class. Originally, the perceptron was intended to be a machine rather
than an algorithm, which led to the development of the “Mark 1 Perceptron” designed for
image recognition. This is made up of 400 photocells connected to artificial neurons. Rosenblatt
(1961) stated that, for him, “the perceptron program is not primarily concerned with
the invention of devices for ‘artificial intelligence’, but rather with investigating the physical
structures and neurodynamic principles which underlie ‘natural intelligence’. A perceptron
is first and foremost a brain model, not an invention for pattern recognition” (Rosenblatt,
1961).
From a modern perspective we can define the perceptron model as a linear binary classifier
as a function for which
! " = 1if# · " + $ > 0
0 ! otherwise
where " are the input data; # are the free parameters which are adjusted during the
learning process such that the predictions made by the algorithm correctly reproduce the
values observed in the data; and $ is some threshold value. Following the discussion
about the (simplified) structure of a single neuron, the above description of the perceptron
can be seen as an artificial neuron that follows the same underlying principles illustrated
in the figure below. In both cases, the input is received and processed in the main
cell body. In the case of the natural neuron, an output signal is created if the excitatory
and inhibitory inputs exceed a threshold and an action potential is released; in the case of
the perceptron, the input is directly received from the “outside world”, and an output is
created if the weighted sum of the inputs exceeds some threshold value.
23
(1.1)
XOR
This is a logic gate which
gives a signal (1) when
the number of inputs is
odd.
Figure 7: Biological Neuron and Perceptron
Source: Kerzel (2020), based on OpenClipart-Vectors (2017).
The perceptron algorithm is trained in the following way using a training sample of known
classes and input values " . Initially, the weights # and the threshold $ are set to zero or
small random values. Then the following procedure is iterated:
• Using the training data, the output corresponding to the current values of weights #
and threshold $ is calculated at training step %.
• The weights are changed according to #& % + 1 = #& % + ' () − +) % "&, ), where ' is
the learning rate; #& are the weights; () is the desired or true output corresponding to
the training event " );+) % is the current output calculated from the weights; and "&, )
are the elements of the input vector for training event ).
The above procedure is repeated until the discrepancy between the calculated and
desired (true) 1
, -
) = 1
,
() − +) % falls below a specified level.
Despite initial promising successes, it became quickly apparent that the perceptron could
not be used in many classification tasks, causing the field to stagnate for many years. Minsky
and Papert (1969) showed that many logical functions, in particular the XOR gate, cannot
be implemented in a single perceptron. Historically, the book caused many controversies
which contributed to a decline in funding and research in the field. It was often
(incorrectly) assumed that the authors of the book were implying that, because a single
perceptron cannot reproduce many logic functions and is hence very limited in its application,
the same would hold for networks of perceptrons. It took years before it was realized
that multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) were able to solve classification problems that a single
perceptron could not handle. MLPs are organized as layers of perceptrons (as shown in
the following figure). The first layer is called the input layer and receives the input from
the outside world. This is followed by an intermediate or hidden layer, where each perceptron
in the input layer has a connection to each perceptron in the hidden layer. The hidden
layer is then connected to one or more perceptrons in the output layer.
24
Figure 8: Multi-Layer Perceptron
Source: Kerzel (2020).
In its original form, each perceptron in the MLP is the same linear model with a single
threshold, as used in the perceptron model discussed earlier. However, the term MLP later
included models in which this threshold was replaced by a non-linear activation function.
These multi-layer perceptrons evolved into the first feed-forward networks by which most
of the modern neural network and deep learning architectures have been influenced.
SUMMARY
In this unit, we explored the origins and motivations that have led to the
development of artificial neural networks. The underlying principle is
inspired by a simplified model of how neurons are organized and connected
in the brain: Each neuron receives input from many other neurons,
and if these signals exceed a certain threshold, an action potential
is released and the neuron produces an output signal that is transmitted
to other neurons.
The perceptron developed by Rosenblatt (1957) is a simple model of
such a neuron, originally developed as a linear classifier for image recognition.
In later years, perceptrons were organized into several layers, and
these multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) were the precursor to the artificial
neural networks used in today's applications.
25

UNIT 2
NETWORK ARCHITECTURES
STUDY GOALS
After completing this unit you will be able to ...
– identify the most important neural network architectures.
– explain what feed-forward, convolutional, and recurrent networks are.
– describe why convolutional neural networks are ideal for image analysis.
– use recurrent neural networks to encode long sequences of events.
2. NETWORK ARCHITECTURES
Introduction
Neural networks and deep learning are at the core of many technological successes ranging
from medicine to autonomous driving. Our brain is capable of performing many different
tasks, such as making calculations, processing and interpreting visual information,
understanding and controlling speech, and controlling our muscles and limbs to operate
machines or ride a bike. The brain is able to perform all these tasks with a single “architecture”.
Fundamentally, the brain of each person follows the same generic anatomy. Neural
networks can also excel at all of the tasks we can perform as a human; however, crucially,
at the current state of the art, no single setup can perform all these tasks equally well.
Developing such an architecture is one of the aims of the research in artificial general
intelligence (AGI); however, it is rather unclear if and when such a system will be able to
perform all tasks a small child can do. Instead, over the years dedicated neural network
architectures have been developed that excel at specific tasks. There are many network
architectures (as shown in the following figure) (Van Veen & Leijnen, 2019), and in this unit
we focus on the three fundamental architectures found in many applications today: the
feed-forward or fully-connected network, the convolutional neural network, and the
recurrent neural network. The feed-forward neural network can be seen as a “general purpose”
neural network and is mainly used for classification and regression. Dedicated networks
can even reconstruct the full probability density distribution which contains all
information about a regression prediction instead of just a single number or a number and
some measure of the associated uncertainty (Feindt & Kerzel, 2006). Convolutional neural
networks are mainly used in image processing, whereas recurrent neural networks are
able to keep a “memory”, and are used in applications such as language understanding
and generation, analysis of time-series data, and predicting the trajectory of moving
objects.
28
Figure 9: The Neural Network Zoo
Source: van Veen and Leijnen (2019). Used with permission.
29
2.1 Feed-Forward Networks
Feed-forward networks can be seen as the “general purpose” neural networks and are
mainly used for classification (i.e., deciding whether an input pattern belongs to one of
two or more classes), and regression (i.e., the prediction of a number or a number with
associated uncertainty or the full probability density function associated with the regression
target).
These types of networks are the evolution of the multi-layer perceptrons discussed earlier.
The fundamental building blocks are the artificial neurons, which are inspired by a simple
model of neurons in the brain.
Figure 10: Biological (Left) and Artificial (Right) Neurons
Source: Kerzel (2020), based on OpenClipart-Vectors (2017).
Similar to the perceptron, this artificial neuron computes its output signal using a weighted
sum of the input signals, where the weights #&) are specific to each neuron ) and indicate
how strongly a specific input signal & should be taken into account. However, compared
to the simple perceptron and the biological neuron, the output of the artificial
neuron is not determined by a simple “all-or-nothing” action potential or threshold but by
an activation function .. The output of the neuron is therefore given by
/) " = . -&#&)"& :
where " is the vector representing the input values "& to the artificial neurons; /) is the
output of the specific neuron ); . denotes the activation function; and #&) are the weights
connecting neuron & to neuron ). The weights are adjusted during the training of the artificial
neurons. A wide range of activation functions can be used. In the case of the perceptron,
the activation function is a simple threshold that can be mathematically represented
by a step or Heaviside function. However, in more modern artificial neurons, a wide range
of activation functions is used in different applications. Around the early 2000s, activation
functions such as . " = tanh " were widely used; in recent applications, piece-wise linear
functions are preferred. A key aspect of any choice of activation function is that it is
30
(2.1)
non-linear. This non-linearity enables the network to learn more complex classification
and regression tasks and is one of the major steps in the evolution from simple multi-layer
perceptrons. A more detailed discussion on the choice of transfer function will follow
when discussing the training of neural networks in detail.
Feed-forward neural networks are built by arranging the above artificial neurons into layers,
similar to multi-layer perceptrons
Figure 11: Feed-Forward Network
Source: Kerzel (2020).
In the input layer, each neuron receives the input value "&, i.e., there is typically one input
neuron per element of the vector " holding the data corresponding to a specific signal to
be analyzed. In many cases, a bias node is added, which receives the constant input "$ = 1
and acts as a further parameter that can adjust the thresholds and different numerical
ranges of the other input variables. The output of the neuron then becomes
/) " = . -&#&)"& + $
where $ is the threshold related to the bias node. This can also be written in matrix notation
as
/ = . 0" + $
where 0 is the weight matrix. In feed-forward networks, the weight matrix is given by
31
(2.2)
(2.3)
0 =
#0, 0 #0, 1 #0, 2 …
#1, 0 #1, 1 #1, 2 …
#2, 0 #2, 1 #2, 2 …
… … … …
Following the input layer, one or more hidden or intermediate layers are added. Each artificial
neuron in one layer is connected to each neuron in the preceding and following layer
#&). Finally, all neurons in the last intermediate layer are connected to one or more output
neurons in the output layer. Because each neuron is connected to all other neurons, these
types of networks are also called fully connected, which implies that each element #&) in
matrix 2.4 is different from zero.
These types of networks are called feed-forward networks because the flow of information
is strictly passed from the input layer to the intermediate layer and finally to the output
layers: The input neurons receive the numerical values from the feature variables, the
prediction is collected from the output neurons, and there are no feedback loops or recursions
in between.
2.2 Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks are a special kind of neural network ideally suited to the
processing and analysis of images. Before investigating why we choose these kind of networks,
we ask ourselves why we cannot use feed-forward networks for image analysis
tasks, since we introduced these as “general-purpose” networks. We remember that in
feed-forward networks each neuron or node in the input layer is associated with a specific
input signal, which is then transmitted to one or more intermediate layers, and all neurons
are (fully) connected with all preceding or following neurons. If we want to choose, e.g., a
500 × 500 pixel color image, we need already 500 × 500 × 3 = 750,000 input neurons
where each pixel has three values (RGB) to describe its color. Allowing for some flexibility
in the intermediate or hidden layer, we may want to use 10,000 nodes, which implies we
have 7,500,000,000 fully-connected weights in the first two layers alone. Determining the
best value of each of these weights will require a large number of images, and it is not
difficult to imagine that the convergence of the training process will be slow at best and,
more likely, not successful. Furthermore, such an approach would analyze the whole
image in each hidden layer. This is because each node is connected to all nodes both in
the upstream and the downstream layers of the neuron we consider. What would happen
if we had several similar images that show the same object (e.g., the same dog) but from
different angles, distances, or rotations? It is still the same dog and, essentially, the same
image, but it would be difficult to find more general abstract descriptions if we had to analyze
each pixel of the pictures in all layers of the network. Additionally, pixels that are far
away from each other are unlikely to be closely related, as images can be quite big and
show complex scenery. Finally, studies of the visual cortex of animals have shown that the
brain does not process the image recorded by the eyes as a whole; rather, its receptive
fields are more locally organized and respond differently to static or moving objects,
32
(2.4)
where even the direction of movement can elicit different responses in the brain (see, e.g.,
Hubel and Wiesel (1962)). We therefore aim to find a neural network architecture more
suited to image analysis.
Convolution and Image Processing
In traditional image analysis, the convolution operator is frequently used to transform
images or highlight specific features. The convolution is a mathematical operation that
applies a function to each element of another function. In images, one “function” is the
image consisting of a grid of ", + coordinates representing the pixels of the image. Each
pixel is then modified by a kernel, resulting in a new image. Mathematically, this can be
expressed as
1* ! ", + = -
& = − 1
2
-
) = − $
$
1 &, ) ! " − &,+ − )
where ! ", + is the original image and 1 the appropriate kernel. By choosing a suitable
kernel, we can, e.g., sharpen or blur the image or detect certain features such as the edges
of objects in the image. This is illustrated in the following figure, where the Sobel operator
or kernel (Sobel, 2014) has been applied. This kernel consists of the two matrices. Applying
these two matrices approximates the derivatives in "− and + − direction, and areas
with rapid changes indicate edges in the image.
1" =
−1 0 +1
−2 0 +2
−1 0 +1
1+ =
−1 −2 −1
0 0 0
+1 +2 +1
33
(2.5)
(2.6)
Figure 12: Edge Detection by Convolving with the Sobel Operator (Left: Original Image;
Right: Convolved Image)
Source: Willems (2018). Pexels license.
Keeping the analogy of traditional image processing in mind, we can conclude that the
convolution operator will be a valuable tool for analyzing images with neural networks.
Unlike in traditional image processing, we do not specify the kernel in convolutional neural
networks; the key idea is that the kernel is learned during the network training. This
means that a convolutional layer in such a network will learn a specific filter representing
a feature of the image.
We have previously seen that the weight matrix for a fully-connected neural network is
given by
0 =
#0, 0 #0, 1 #0, 2 …
#1, 0 #1, 1 #1, 2 …
#2, 0 #2, 1 #2, 2 …
… … … …
where each element #&) is different from zero. Since the kernel used in the convolution
stays the same as it is moved across the image, the resulting weights in the convolutional
neural network have a special structure. This is easily understood in the case of onedimensional
convolutions (see the following figure). The input signal is, again, represented
by "&. In the one-dimensional case, we do not use images but rather, for example,
time-series data such as an audio signal or stock market prices. The kernel is represented
by a blue square, and in this example, we use a simple kernel that only connects two adjacent
signals "& and "& + 1. As the same convolutional kernel is moved across the signal, the
weights #0 and #1 are applied repeatedly across the whole signal range "1, "2, …, "3.
34
Figure 13: Weight Sharing in One-Dimensional Convolutions
Source: Kerzel (2020).
This leads to a special weight structure when describing the output of the convolutional
nodes mathematically:
0 =
#0, 0 #0, 1 #0, 2 …
#1, 0 #1, 1 #1, 2 …
#2, 0 #2, 1 #2, 2 …
… … … …
=
#0 #1 0 0 0 …
0 #0 #1 0 0 …
0 0 #0 #1 0 …
… … … … … …
This structure, where the same weights are used repeatedly, is also called weight sharing.
The same approach also holds more generally for two- and higher dimensional convolutions.
This sharing of the weights allows for a drastic reduction in the number of weights
needed in a convolutional layer compared to a fully-connected neural network layer.
Stride and Padding
When performing a convolution, the kernel is applied to the image. This is illustrated in
the following figure, which shows a 3×3 kernel applied to the pixel in the second row and
second column of the image. Taking the value of this image and all eight direct neighbors
into account, the resulting value of the pixel is calculated.
35
Figure 14: Convolution: A Kernel (Blue) is Applied to the Pixel in the Second Row,
Second Column of the Grid
Source: Kerzel (2020).
This process is then repeated to cover the pixels of the original image. The convolution
kernel can be moved in one or more steps (see the following figure). This is called stride. A
stride of one means that the kernel is moved one pixel in either "− or + − direction. If
values larger than one are chosen for the stride, the convolutional kernel is moved more
than one step each time. This implies that the resulting image will not have values in each
new pixel, i.e., the resulting image will be down-sampled from the original image as fewer
pixels of the original image contribute to the new image.
Figure 15: Stride = 1 (Left: Original Position of the Convolution Kernel; Right: Kernel
Moved One Step to the Right)
Source: Kerzel (2020).
Special care has to be taken when the convolutional kernel reaches the edges of the
image, since the mathematical operation is no longer defined if the kernel is moved outside
the image region. There are several approaches to deal with this situation. In the simplest
case, the outermost range of pixels of the image is ignored: the kernel is moved
towards the edges of the image, but no further. Hence, the outermost layers of pixels
(depending on the size of the kernel) cannot be taken into account, and the resulting con-
36
volved image is smaller than the original image. While this may be acceptable, or even
desired, in other cases the original dimensions of the image should be retained. In order to
make the convolution operation valid on all original pixels, the image is extended such
that zeros are added around the image as required to cover the convolutional kernel in all
cases. This is illustrated in the following figure: The grid represents the original image. The
convolutional kernel is now applied to the pixel in the first row and column. Without padding,
this operation would not be valid. However, as we add zeros around the image
(green area), the operation can be completed.
Figure 16: Padding
Source: Kerzel (2020).
Pooling
The convolutional layer(s) of a convolutional neural network allow(s) the learning of a specific
filter that in turn represents specific features of an image. However, one of the challenges
of the output of convolutional layers is that they are sensitive to the precise location
of the feature in the image. This implies that small displacements, rotations, or
cropping of the input image will result in quite different outputs of the convolutional layer,
even if the image is essentially the same. Typically, similar issues in signal processing are
addressed by downsampling, i.e., a lower resolution version of the signal is created that
retains the most prominent features or important elements but removes some fine details.
In convolutional neural networks, pooling layers are used by applying a filter to a region of
neighboring pixels (see the following figure). In earlier implementations, the average of all
pixel values was typically used (see, e.g., LeCun et al. (1990). However, it was found that
using the maximum value within each region was more effective and led to higher performance
of the resulting convolutional neural networks (Scherer et al., 2010).
37
Figure 17: MaxPool: A Pooling Filter is Applied to the Image and the Maximum Value in
Each Region is Used to Downsample the Image
Source: Kerzel (2020).
Adding such a pooling layer has the advantage that the down-sampled image contains a
“summary” of the features extracted by a convolutional network layer that is more robust
to small changes in the image. However, while this approach does make the convolutional
layer more robust, it also means that it is no longer invariant with respect to translations
or rotations of the image. The approach developed by Zhang (2019) aims at restoring
translation invariance.
Convolutional Neural Networks
We now have all the ingredients to build a convolutional neural network from the above
building blocks. The input signal, such as an image, is presented to a convolutional layer
which takes the kernel size, as well as the parameters for padding and stride, as input. As
discussed, the convolutional layer learns a particular filter during network training, i.e., it
extracts a specific set of features from the image. Typically, a rectification non-linearity is
applied after the convolution layer in neural networks of the form +& = max 4&, 0 . This is
done for two reasons: First, the convolution operator is a linear transformation. As in the
case of the “normal” artificial neuron, adding a non-linear function makes subsequent
applications of the convolution more powerful. If such a non-linearity was not added, two
convolutions could be expressed as a single linear combination. Second, edges or other
features learned by convolutional layers which go in opposite directions should not cancel
each other out. In most cases, a pooling layer is then applied to downsample the features
created by the convolutional network layer.
In a deep convolutional neural network, several of these combinations of convolutional,
non-linear, and pooling layers are stacked on top of each other. This repeated process
allows the later convolutional neural network layers to extract further features from the
image, building on the output of the earlier convolutional layers. For example, the earlier
convolutional layers may learn lower-level features, such as edges, whereas later convolutional
neural networks are able to learn higher-level, more abstract features.
Typically, convolutional neural networks are used for classification tasks and assign the
input signal, such as an image, to one or more output classes. For example, we may wish
to separate images of dogs from images of cats. As the feed-forward networks discussed
earlier are used for classification tasks, a fully-connected neural network is used in the
final few layers of the network architecture. Hence, the convolutional network layers
38
extract the features from the input signal, and then the feed-forward network uses these
features to assign the most probable class to the input. Instead of assigning the class
directly, a softmax function is used in most cases. The softmax function 5 is defined as
5 4& = 64&
-) = 1
1 64)
for 1 classes. In the case of neural networks, the output 5 is interpreted as the probability
that the input signal belongs to class &, normalized to all classes. Calculating this value for
all possible classes & = 1, …,1, the class with the highest probability is assigned as the
result of the classification. In many cases, an additional threshold is required which
ensures the network is sufficiently “confident” that the output belongs to the class
assigned, and some form of error message or “no assignment” is given if the threshold criterion
is not met.
Notable CNN Architectures
One of the earliest versions of deep convolutional neural networks for image classification
is LeNet-5 (LeCun et al., 1998), which identifies handwritten digits in the range 0—9. Now
known as the Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology (MNIST) data set, it
is a popular small data set for practicing the handling of convolutional neural networks.
LeNet-5 has a simple architecture (from a modern perspective). The input layer is followed
by two convolutional layers (each followed by an average pooling layer), followed by a
dense layer with 120 nodes, a dense layer of 84 nodes, and finally a dense output layer
with ten nodes, one per digit that need to be classified.
In later years, image processing network architectures were developed and compared in
ImageNet challenges. The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge aims to
make the performance of various image-processing neural networks comparable by providing
a large benchmark data set on which new algorithms can be tested and compared
to the performance of existing ones (Russakovsky et al., 2015). A series of workshops and
challenges between 2010 and 2017 focused on advancing the field of computer vision
(Computer Vision Group, Technical University of Munich, n.d.). Compared to the MNIST
data set, the images are much bigger than the 28 × 28 pixel-sized images of MNIST and
consist of approximately 1,000 categories (instead of ten for the digits). The entire Image-
Net data set contains more than 14 million images.
In 2012, ImageNet (Krizhevksy et al., 2012), also called AlexNet after the first name of the
first author of the paper, won the ImageNet challenge by a large margin. Conceptionally,
the network is very similar to LeNet-5; however, it uses eight convolutional layers with
max-pooling instead of average pooling, and the three dense layers at the end of the network
are much bigger (4,096, 4,096, and 1,000 nodes) to accommodate the many categories
in the ImageNet data set.
In 2014, the ImageNet challenge was won by a new network developed by Google called
GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al., 2015), based on the “network-in-network” (NiN) architecture
(Lin et al., 2013). The idea behind the NiN approach is that convolutional layers are
arranged in blocks, where a “normal” convolutional layer is followed by two 1×1 convo-
39
(2.7)
lutional layers. These additional layers function as a fully-connected (dense) layer acting
on each pixel location independently. In GoogLeNet, the convolutional layers are also
arranged in inception blocks, where the input to each block is split into different paths,
each consisting of different convolutional layers, some of which are followed by pooling
layers and others not. The output of these paths is then merged in a concatenation step.
The full network architecture is given by a combination of conventional convolutional layers
as well as a number of these inception blocks, followed by a dense layer for the final
classification task. These architectures were refined in later years in Inception V3 (Szegedy
et al., 2016) and Inception V4 (Szegedy et al., 2017).
In 2015, the ImageNet challenge was won by researchers from Microsoft using residual
networks or ResNet (He et al., 2016). The main idea of this approach is motivated by the
fact that (at least in principle) networks should be able to approximate any function. In
residual networks, an identity “short-cut” is placed skipping one or more layers (see following
figure).
Figure 18: Idea of the Residual Block in ResNet
Source: Kerzel (2020).
This means that the residual block between these direct connections only needs to learn
the deviations from the identity rather than the full function. The full ResNet architecture
that won the ImageNet challenge is a complex arrangement of many convolutional layers
arranged in residual blocks with identity connections between them. The final layer is a
dense layer with 1,000 output nodes to accommodate the different classes in the challenge.
40
2.3 Recurrent Neural Networks, Memory
Cells, and LSTMs
In the feed-forward and convolutional neural networks discussed so far, information
flowed in one direction, from the input layer to the output layer. Each of the layers may be
quite complicated or complex; however, fundamentally, each neuron accepts input from
the previous layer, performs some computation, and passes it on to one or more neurons
in the next layer.
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) extend this approach and allow connections not only to
the next layer but also to previous layers, the current layer, or even onto the neurons
themselves (see the following figure). This allows RNNs to develop a memory that can, for
example, be used for language generation (Martens & Sutskever, 2011). They can even
learn how simple computer programs work by learning the characters of the code and
associating this with the desired output, hence, learning what the code does (Zaremba &
Sutskever, 2014).
Figure 19: Overview of Recurrent Neural Networks
Source: Kerzel (2020).
Recurrent Neurons
So far, we have considered neurons that take an input and compute an output (as shown
in the left part of the following figure). Mathematically, we can express this as
/) " = . $ + -&#&)"&
= . $ + " · #
41
where " is the input to the neuron, /) the output of neuron ), $ the bias node, . · the
transfer function, and #&) the weights connecting the neuron to other neurons. To aid the
discussion of how to develop recurrent neurons, we will use a simplified representation of
this neuron (as shown in the right part of the following figure). The summation sign 5
represents the processing of the input, and the piece-wise linear function represents a
popular choice of the activation or transfer function . · .
Figure 20: Artificial Neuron: Simplified View
Source: Kerzel (2020).
In order to make this neuron recurrent, we allow for the output of the neuron being sent
back to previous layers or itself. In this example, we sent the output of the neuron back
onto itself (see following figure).
Figure 21: Recurrent Neuron
Source: Kerzel (2020).
This means that the output of the neuron now depends on both the previous inputs to the
neuron and the output it has calculated, i.e., the output of the neuron becomes time
dependent. In the first step, the output of the recurrent neuron is the same as for a normal,
non-recurrent neuron. The neuron receives the input but as this is the first step, no
previous output has been calculated; hence, the output is the same as for the non-recur-
42
rent neuron: /) = . $ + -&#&)"& . However, in the next step, the output of the neuron
depends both on the next input " and the output of the neuron at the previous step.
Hence, at some time (or step) %, the output depends on both the input and the previous
outputs at % − 1,% − 2, . . . ,% − 3, assuming no previous output (represented by
/% = 0 = 0) at time % = 0 in the first step. Each recurrent neuron has two sets of weights.
One set of weights is used for the inputs " , and the other set is used for the outputs of the
previous time steps. Mathematically, the output of the neuron is then given by
/) % = . " · # " + /) % − 1 #/ + $
where /) % is the output of the recurrent neuron we wish to evaluate at time %, " is the
vector of input values to the neuron, # " is the set of weights used for the inputs, /) % − 1
is the output of the neuron at the previous time-step % − 1, # / is the set of weights used
for the previous output of the neuron, and $ represents the bias node. Instead of sending
the output back to a single neuron, we can send the output back to a group of neurons or
even a whole network layer of recurrent neurons (see following figure).
Figure 22: Recurrent Network Layer
Source: Kerzel (2020).
In this case, equation 2.8 becomes
768/ % = . " · # " + / % − 1 · # / + $
Memory Cells
In the simple recurrent neuron or layer of recurrent neurons, we sent the output computed
by the neuron(s) back as additional input. However, we can make the recurrent neuron
more powerful by extending this approach and including a hidden state into the loop,
sending the output back and creating a memory cell. This hidden state is characterized by
some function # % , which depends on the previous inputs, earlier outputs of the neuron,
and the hidden state at earlier steps. In the simplest form, the hidden state just sends the
output back and becomes the standard recurrent neuron. There are many ways to define
43
(2.8)
(2.9)
the function for the hidden state, and the exact setup depends on which task the neuron
should solve. In particular, such hidden states allow us to retain a long-term memory of
inputs encountered at earlier time steps.
Figure 23: Recurrent Neuron with Memory Cell
Source: Kerzel (2020).
LSTM and GRU
One of the main challenges of using recurrent neural networks is learning long sequences,
such as a very long sentence or a poem. For example, imagine you need to summarize or
translate a very long sentence, but your memory is not long enough that you can remember
the beginning of the sentence once you have reached its end. Learning such long
sequences requires that we take more than one previous output into account, i.e., the output
does not only depend on time steps % and % − 1, but also steps % − 2, % − 3, …, % − 3.
This makes the training of RNNs very difficult and unstable.
Figure 24: Sequence of Simple Memory Cells
Source: Kerzel (2020).
The hidden state can be used to extend the recurrent neurons into a memory cell. An
example of a sequence of such memory cells is shown in the figure above, where the internal
state of the cell is represented by a simple function such as tanh " . By creating a
sophisticated hidden state, the RNN can perform much better. The general idea is to create
44
a memory structure (M) and decide during the training process which parts of the previously-
seen input data should be remembered and which parts of the memory should be
forgotten, as they are no longer relevant. This then forms a candidate for the new memory
(M'). Additionally, it needs to be decided which part of the new information should be
added to the memory. We can express this as
M % = remember % *M % − 1 + add % * M' % .
The so-called Long Short-Term Memory (or LSTM) cell has proven particularly successful in
retaining the memory of long sequences efficiently. LSTMs were originally proposed by
Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) and improved over the years by many researchers, for
example, Sak et al. (2014) and Zaremba et al. (2014).
Figure 25: LSTM Cell
Source: Kerzel (2020).
The LSTM cell is quite complicated (see the previous figure). Compared to the simple
recurrent cell, the hidden state is split into two functions: 8 % and # % . We can interpret
8 % as the long-term hidden state and # % as the short-term hidden state. The general
idea is that the network can learn what to store in the long-term state, which information
to access from the long-term state, and which information should be removed from it. This
is done via a series of gates. Starting with the long-term memory 8 % , it first transverses a
forget gate where it is decided which information is removed from the memory. It then
passes an addition operation where new memories, decided by the input gate, are added
to the long-term memory. After these two operations, the long-term memory 8 % is successfully
modified and passed on to the next step. After the addition operation, the long-
45
term memory is copied and passed through a tanh · function, and the resulting output
is passed through an output gate. This results in a new short-term memory # % , which is
equal to the output / % of the LSTM cell at time %.
The key to the operation of the LSTM cell is how new memories are formed. Both the previous
short-term memory # % − 1 , as well as the new input vector " % , are sent to four
separate feed-forward (or fully-connected) neural networks. The output equations for
these networks are
! % =5 # "! · " % + # #! · # % − 1 + $!
9 % =tanh # "9 · " % + # #9 · # % − 1 + $9
& % =5 # "& · " % + # #& · # % − 1 + $&
) % =5 # ") · " % + # #) · # % − 1 + $)
where # "!,# "9,# "&# ") are the weights connecting the network layers to the input " ;
# #!,# #9,# #&# #) are the weights connecting the network layers to the previous shortterm
memory # % − 1 ; and $!, $9, $&, $) are the bias terms for the four networks. The network
described by 9 % has a tanh · activation function, while the other three networks
have a logistic activation function with outputs in 0, 1 . The main network inside the
LSTM cell is 9 % with the tanh · activation function. This network acts as the “normal”
hidden state found in basic memory cells (see the middle cell in the figure “Sequence of
Simple Memory Cells”). It processes both the input " and the hidden state # % − 1 . In a
basic memory cell, this network alone would determine the output / % and new hidden
state # % ; however, in an LSTM cell, this is modified by the three other networks ! % , & % ,
and ) % . These act as gate controllers, and during network training they learn how to
modify the memory of the LSTM cell. The network ! % controls the forget gate and learns
which information should be erased from the long-term memory 8 % . The network & %
controls the input gate and learns which information from the network 9 % should be
added to the long-term memory. The network ) % controls the output gate and learns
which information from the long-term memory 8 % should be accessed and added to the
short-term memory # % and the output / % .
The Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), shown in the following figure, is similar to the LSTM cell
but much simpler (Cho et al., 2014b).
46
Figure 26: Gated Recurrent Unit
Source: Kerzel (2020).
Instead of two hidden states, there is only one (# % ). The forget and input gates are controlled
by a single network 4 % , and there is no output gate; the complete hidden state is
sent as output at each step. However, a new controller (' % ) decides which part of the previous
hidden state # % − 1 will be sent to the main network 9 % , which again has a
tanh · activation function. For further details about the setup of LSTM and GRU, see
Géron (2019). In a recent study, Greff et al. (2015) show that modifications to the origial
LSTM setup, such as the GRU, demonstrate similar performance while reducing the complexity
and number of parameters that need to be trained, which is beneficial from a practical
point of view.
SUMMARY
This unit discusses the most prevalent types of neural networks. Fullyconnected
or dense networks are typically used for classification or
regression tasks. Convolutional neural networks are mainly used for
image analysis. Inspired by the filters in traditional image anlaysis, convolutional
networks learn to extract features from images or other data
that can be used to, e.g., classify what is shown in the image. Recurrent
neural networks include a feedback loop where the output of the neurons
is used as another input to the same neuron again. This allows the
47
use of neural networks in complex tasks that show a time-dependent
structure, such as time-series forecasting or natural language processing.
48
